---
date_created: 2025-05-27
tags: [opinion]
author: Jonathan Raines
title: Does AI Benefit Society?
permalink: /thoughts/does-ai-benefit-society
layout: post
abbreviations:
  - "AI: Artificial Intelligence"
  - "LLM: Large Language Model"
  - "RL: Reinforcement Learning"
excerpt: "Yes...with major caveats."
---

<details>
	<summary>This question needs clarifying. For this discussion, I use a broad definition of AI, taking to mean anything commonly referred to as AI since the 1990's. I also consider the risk-benefit balance rather than the benefit alone. I also consider that society is not homogenous and will not benefit equally.</summary>
	<p>Reinforcement Learning, Baysian optimisation, computer vision, and (going back further) computational logic and fuzzy logic can all be described as AI.</p>
	<details>
		<summary>The older technologies in that list are established, widely used, and have already had a measurable benefit</summary>
		<p>Fuzzy logic is used for controlling household appliances such as washing machines. As a result, washing machines are more reliable and water efficient. #citation-needed</p>
	</details>
	<details>
		<summary>Benefiting society is also vague</summary>
		<p>Society is not homogenous. It is possible for something to benefit some of society and detriment other parts.</p>
	</details>
</details>
<details>
	<summary>There are certainly some significant benefits.</summary>
	<details>
		<summary>Medicine is being made faster and better.</summary>
		<details>
			<summary>Solving the Protein Folding Problem will allow for better drugs to be discovered.</summary>
			<p>AlphaFold is an Reinforcement Learning|RL agent that can predict the shape of a protein from the chemical formula.
			Before it, methods including mass spectrometry could give us the chemical formula, but not the 3D shape.
			The shape is needed to predict the function of the protein, and how it will interact with molecules.
			To illustrate the scale of this problem. AlphaFold was unveiled at CASP, a yearly competition to incentivise solving the problem.
			Research labs, such as those as UCSF and Univesity of Boulder Colorado had been working for years to determine the shape of one protein could now do it in seconds.
			It will speed up the process of drug discovery.
			However, the predictions are not always accurate enough for drug discovery purposes.
			#todo find concrete references of achievements made possible.</p>
		</details>
		<details>
			<summary>Computer vision is automating parts of medical imaging, speeding up pathways and alleviating staff shortages.</summary>
			<p>#todo Add example seen at AI UK</p>
		</details>
		<details>
			<summary>Computer vision can also extract more diagnostic information from medical images.</summary>
			<p>#todo The example of retina scans.</p>
		</details>
	</details>
</details>
<details>
	<summary>There are also certainly risks. Some of which have already resulted in harm. A challenge is that profile of risks is diverse, and many of those risks are hard to quantify.</summary>
	<details>
		<summary>Risk is combination of likelihood and severity.</summary>
		<p>Likelihood is how likely a harm will occur. Severity is how bad that harm is. It can be hard to estimate either, but more commonly likelihood is the source of our uncertainty.</p>
	</details>
	<details>
		<summary>Image, audio, and video generation can be used to spread disinformation. High likelihood, uncertain severity.</summary>
		<p>Commonly, this has a political agenda. There are also examples of it being used to make conspiracy theories (such as extinct giants building the pyramids) #todo link.
		The severity is hard to quantify as its effects are hard to disentangle from other factors such as polarised mainstream news outlets.</p>
	</details>
	<details>
		<summary>Audio and video generation can be used to scale scam phone calls, or for identity theft. High likelihood, moderate severity.</summary>
		<p>Some banks use voice authentication. Even newer banks like Monzo use video authentication. #todo
		Scam callers no longer need a call centre, they can use an LLM and text-to-speech to conduct their operation at scale. #todo</p>
	</details>

	<details>
		<summary>Creating thinking machines poses an existential threat. Maximum severity, likelihood hotly debated.</summary>
	</details>
</details>
